I was involved in that whole effort from kind of its
embryo stage up until now, and I went out on the
third cruise of the Gromar Challenger, and I think
we made some fantastic scientific discoveries on
that. We went across the South Atlantic here and
drilled a set of holes across Mid-Atlantic Ridge,
and for the first time we were really able to pin
down all the things that people had said in
seafloor spreading by actually getting samples
there and dating them and so on. And this was the
first real evidence of seafloor spreading that
was direct, and I think that's a significant
accomplishment. I think between that and the heat
flows will be my major accomplishments. I think
I've had some impact from the administrative
side, but it's tougher to evaluate those, and
there are a lot of administrators around. One
happens to be lucky enough to be in the right spot at
the right time, and you can have some impact on
things. If you're at the wrong time, it's tough. As
historians, we call that the monkey bite theory of
history. Crimean War began because a monkey bit a
Turk on the neck, and we've always maintained that
those people who believe to be in the right spot at
the right time are believers not in great men, but
in monkey bite theory.
There's a lot to be said for that.
What direction do you foresee Woods Hole going?
beside more and more applied science. Is there any
particular direction you'd like to take Woods
Hole to? Well, I
feel that
the one thing that I feel strongest about in making
Woods Hole a better place
is to develop its independence from the federal
government a little more than it is. We depend very
highly on grants and contracts. 85% of our support
or something comes from that. And we're pretty
much at the whim of the federal governments of what
happens to be in vogue this year and so on. I'd like
to see us develop an independence, and perhaps the
only way one can do this is through building up the
endowment to the point where we can support a large
enough fraction of ourself that we have the
independence to do what we feel is right and not
what happens to be the thing that the government is
supporting at that particular time. Now, a lot of
times these match very nicely. They match mainly
by necessity, I guess. If we're not doing what the
government's supporting, we end up not doing
anything. were forced into that, and I'd like to
break away a little bit from this sense of being
tied to the government. I think that's the single
biggest change I could foresee happening here. Do
you find personally that there are more
bureaucratic entanglements and snares now than
there were, say, ten years ago in dealing with the
government? Oh, yes. Every time you turn around,
And the government is tending to use its
contracting powers over a lot of people to
accomplish a lot of its social aims. And sometimes
these accomplish the ends, and other times they
just cause more complication and cost than they
might be working on. I'm sure you've heard
examples of this from the OSHA, the Affirmative
Action, to handicap, to all the kind of
regulations that get put upon you
and make business more costly, more expensive,
and hopefully reaching some end. I think they are
useful. I don't object to what these programs are
trying to do.
There may be better ways of accomplishing And it
makes life very complicated here, and we're
forced to build up an infrastructure in terms of
bureaucracy here to match the bureaucracy that
gets put on us by Washington, which tends to make,
gets the administration in bad with the
scientists, because it looks like we're getting
bigger, taking more of their money as they see it,
and yet it's one of the necessities in life to do
this. I'm not sure there's any way of getting
around it.
But life has become complicated. Grants seem to be
getting smaller. We're writing more and more
proposals. The proposals are getting more and
more complicated, thicker.
We looked at last year and found out that we were I
think we have something of the order of 400
individual grants and contracts at this place
here. It's something of the order of two a working
day. So that means roughly two proposals a day on
the average go out of this institution. It has to be
written by somebody and reviewed and read.
Usually these are just for a one-year thing. Each
scientist, on the average, must have about three
or four contracts. He spends a large fraction of
his time writing proposals. It's a waste of
effort. It wasn't this way in the past. Again, this
ties into the peer review system and the
competition. If somehow there are ways to reduce
this, and there are ways that you can do this,
NSF would simply go to three- or four-year grants
and stop a little bit of it. There are some
disadvantages in this. If you give a grant for
three or four years and you fix the budget, by the
time the fourth year comes along, the inflation
has ruined you and the The guy dies his fourth year,
he can't keep things going because he can't
possibly estimate what's going to happen in terms
of cost.
But nonetheless, I think longer term grants would
be a move in the right direction to get off this
proposal writing treadmill that everybody's on.
And it's not restricted to us. It's the same all
over. There's even talk about seven and ten year
grants. Well, that's an interesting thought. One
ought to think of, if you're going in terms of
seven- and ten-year grants, of tying this a little
bit in with the tenure system of universities,
which is an archaic system.
Maybe there's a better way of doing both of these.
When you talk in terms of specialization of
younger oceanographers, I have a feeling that,
too, is academic-wide because it's difficult for
a young man to be a generalist or work on group
projects when he always faces the problems of
developing tenure. That's right. Not only
developing tenure, but he's in this proposal
competition in oceanography no matter where he's
at. You've got to be specialized to compete in
that.
And the whole tenure system is, well, I don't know
that the tenure system is so much set up as
specialization. You've got to make your mark
somehow. And you've got to be able to prove it. And
you usually prove it by publications and so on. But
these can be done. And it's harder to do in a
generalized point of view. And usually only the
more senior people that have been in longer and
have a broader overview are capable of doing that.
So it's easier to do this, the more specialized you
are, because you know more about it than anyone
else in the business. You're the only guy that's
thought about it, essentially. And it's easier to
get ahead that way. It's essentially the way the
whole research game has gone over a number of
years.
All right. So personally, possibly a return to
research.
moving more and more away from the federal
bureaucracy, possibly in terms of your
institution. What else in the future? Well, I've
spent a lot of my activities in the last few years on
things outside of Woods Hole.
And I suspect that's where I get a lot of my
satisfaction now. You know, you can get it out of
research, but you've got to be in the trenches on
the front line doing the research to get this. And
it's difficult to do research from an
administrative position. I find it very
difficult. You just can't spend the time on it that
you need. And you don't get much satisfaction out
of solving everybody else's problems and trying
to keep the place going. So the way that one tends to
contribute when you're in an administrative job
is doing things on the outside, on
committees and so forth. I'm president of the
American Geophysical Union now, which turned out
to be more work than I thought. But again, I find
this a satisfying thing to work on these kind of
things, spend some time in there.
I guess as time goes on, I might even spend more
time. If I can get free from, get organized well
enough to do my inside chores in less time so I have
more free time to do it.
What were your major disappointments as an
oceanographer? What did you want desperately to
succeed, which failed?
That's the toughest one yet.
I guess I've been pretty fortunate that most of the
things have gone pretty well. I was a little
disappointed when the Moho got shot down. Put a
little bit of effort into that.
I think, in general, things have gone. pretty
well. No real complaints. Okay. And I take it if you
had all of it over again, you would choose to do it
roughly the same way? I suspect so. I don't know
where I'd make any different decisions right now.
Is there anything you'd like to add to the tape?
No, I can't. I'm sure that By the time you're
halfway back to Texas, I'll think of a lot of things
that I should have mentioned to you. Hindsight's
always easier than foresight. No, I can't think of
anything. I've enjoyed the opportunity to sit and
chat with you this way. Oh, it's been my pleasure.
You know, it would be interesting, you say you're
not going to write this history, you're just
making it available online. For everybody else,
on the other hand, you have talked personally to
all these people, and you probably have a much
better feeling than what's just on tape. And it
seems to me it's a shame that you can't put some kind
of story together, even if it's kind of a human
interest story on bits and pieces, how you see
things fall together and so
on. I have two regrets about this project that I
began tonight. One thing I regret is very simple. I
wish every place I had gone, I had taken a camera.
I'm sorry now that I haven't put together a
portfolio of oceanographers. That'd be
interesting. So that when people listen to the
tapes or read the transcript, they couldn't see
them. And the second thing I wish I had done is I wish
I had, every time after I had left an interview, I'd
sit down with my typewriter for 35 minutes and
typed up my impressions of that individual. Well,
that's the kind of things that I was meaning. You
know, you've got a feeling that goes along with
just what's on tape. And you've talked to a lot of
people on this, at least from what I've heard you
say, and these are all very knowledgeable people,
and I think it would be nice. I've often wondered
why somebody hasn't put down a good history of
oceanography. And I think just to put it on tape and
leave it is kind of a shame. On the other hand, I
suspect you've got another year's worth of taping
or something like that. Probably, if we're
financed again, that's certain. Another year's
worth of taping. I think we need to. I think also we
need to make secondary interviews. I think one of
the things that we need to do, you're speaking of
things you remember far away. I think one thing
that... One weakness in the writing of
oceanography is after they put all this down, if
they would go back and talk to the people again and
see how they perceive it a second time, it'd make a
sizable difference to what they're saying. I had a
similar interview with a guy from Stanford who was
kind of putting together a history on seafloor
spray, plate tectonics. I've forgotten what his
name was.
He was going around the country interviewing a lot
of scientists to try and get their opinion of how
they thought plate tectonics developed.
And that's sort of the whole story of the field that
I've been in. That's been kind of the crowning
glory. It's been like the Darwin theory of
evolution in biology. It's been that sort of
equivalent for geology. has that much of an impact
on geology. And we were all part of that. So I'd love
to see this story develop sometime. I don't know
whether it'll ever come out or whether it's just
going to end up taped there. But the other thing
that has been missing, and you're getting a lot of
this, is how oceanography got started in this
country. And guys like Revell, when he was a
commander in the Navy, and Mary Sears, who was
working down with him, Charlie Fishu, who was in
Rhode Island, went down there for a little while.
These guys were all part of this business getting
started. And it's sort of going by the way. They're
all disappearing now. Yeah. Sure are. And
rapidly. Menzies died last year, you know? Bob
Menzies? Yes. I don't know about that. You know,
Sumner Pike, as well as the great ones like Ewing
and Islum, there are just not any place for them to
take. That's right. Sumner would have been a great
one to interview. He's such a bullshitter and a
gentleman. He's a great guy. I think of him as one of
the nicest people I've ever met. He was just such a
great person. I got to know him quite well.
If
you ever have time, it'll take a long time, you'll
have to listen to my tape with Roger Revelle. Oh,
I'd love to. You know, I know Roger so well. I'm
afraid that when Revelle dies, that one of the
things they're going to have to understand, that
scientists and historians are going to have to
understand is why he was so great. And if you can be
with him for a while and captures enthusiasm and
human quality, it's just absolutely
overwhelming. Yeah, he is such a compassionate
person. And
he's always been that way.
He just doesn't think in small terms or in small
things. I think he's one of the great scientists of
our time. Not that he's so much of a scientist, but
he's one of the great figures in science of our
time. Probably more underestimated than almost
any. He just has never
I think made the mark that I really feel that he
deserves.
Part of this must be the fact that he changed fields
in the middle of his career.
He certainly reached the top in oceanography, and
there wasn't much else to go there.
Well, he wanted desperately to be chancellor of
San Diego. Yeah. I suppose that he being himself
and the regents being themselves, the political
division was just simply too great.
It's too bad. Too bad for San Diego. Too bad for...
What do you want to do? You know, I talked to him when
that happened. I was in Washington.
It was... saying what, wondering what he should
do. I
talked to some people
that found out this job was available in the
Interior Department. I think it was Assistant
Secretary of Interior. It wasn't Assistant. It
was sort of Science Advisor for the Interior
Department. And I sort of helped talk them in.
Coming back to Washington, he spent about a year in
Washington in that job, as I recall. And it was a
real transition zone. I guess he went from there to
Harvard. I'm not quite sure. I assume it was in that
job where he worked in Pakistan for a while. And I
think after he got back from there, he went on to the
Population Control Center at Harvard. Well, he
certainly continued to work in Pakistan.
He was very worried about the problems of the world
and people.